I believe an extremely compact and effective way to establish the New Deal on Data is with a “Disclosure Rule” that requires any government or commercial entity that uses electronic personal information in the ordinary course of business to disclose certain metadata about the personal information they use, how they acquire it, what they use it for, and how they dispose of it.

While ownership rights in data are foundational, they do not solve every problem.  What does it mean to “own” your medical records?  Can people “own” all the data about a two-party transaction?  Most importantly, ownership rights might be Superman, but the “I Agree” button is kryptonite.

There are other models for protecting people’s rights that are not based on ownership, can’t be waived, and are not voided by public disclosure: HIPAA, Identity Theft, Do Not Call.

Many privacy protection regimes are based on a “perimeter defense” of non-disclosure.  We live in a world in which our digital and physical activities unavoidably leave a profusion of digital breadcrumbs.   The strategy for controlling personal information that has worked through the ages – simple non-disclosure – is increasingly obsolete. 

We need to recognize the individual’s ongoing interest in their personal data, even after it has been transferred to a third party.  You always have an interest in your personal information in the digital age.

Akerlof shows that hypothetically, the information problem can either cause an entire market to collapse or contract it into an adverse selection of low-quality products." Nobel web site.

"A key insight in his "lemons paper" is that economic agents may have strong incentives to offset the adverse effects of information problems on market efficiency. Akerlof argues that many market institutions may be regarded as emerging from attempts to resolve problems due to asymmetric information. One such example is guarantees from car dealers; others include brands, chain stores, franchising and different types of contracts." Nobel web site.

"Stiglitz and his numerous coauthors have time and again substantiated that economic models may be quite misleading if they disregard informational asymmetries. Their common message has been that in the perspective of asymmetric information, many markets take on a completely different guise, as do the conclusions regarding appropriate forms of public-sector regulation." Nobel web site.
